---
title: "MT-32 Hell"
date: 2024-06-07T23:00:14-07:00
draft: true
toc: false
images:
tags:
  - MiSTer
  - Preservation
  - DOSBox
  - MS-DOS
  - MT-32
---

I didn't actually own a MT-32 when I was a kid. The hardware was insanely expensive. As such, I didn't have the full context for exactly how bizarrely messed up the MT-32 compatibility is on MS-DOS in general.

It turns out there are three versions of the MT-32 hardware, which we'll call old", "new", and "CM-32L/LAPC-1".

The "old" version of the firmware had some bugs in it that were worked around by game developers. The "new" version (2.0 or newer) firmwares fix these bugs at the cost of compatibility. The CM-32L firmware is an extended version of "new" with additional features and may not always be compatible with "new" 100% of the time.

Additionally, the "old" firmware has a specific bug that triggers on faster machines. It REQUIRES a delay of at least 32ms between each SysEx command message sent to it. On older, slower machines that wasn't an issue, but as machines got faster it became easily possible to overwhelm the MT-32 with the commands resulting in a "EXC CHECKSUM ERROR" message popping up on the LCD display of the MT-32.

Getting games working well on the MiSTer FPGA with either a MT32-pi or MidiLink UDP requires you to determine the following:

1. How fast should the game itself be running? Many older MS-DOS games didn't actually have any speed limiting, so it's possible for those games to run in perpetual fast-forward if you're not careful. You'll need to investigate this carefully and spend a good chunk of time playtesting to see if you can find obviously broken parts of the game.

2. Does the game need the old or new firmware revision? If it works with the newer, should you use the enhanced CM-32L firmware instead?

3. If it needs the older firmware, will it trigger the SysEx bug on a faster computer?

Based on the results of those questions and a lot of research (thankfully VOGONS has put together a pretty exhaustive list of MT-32 compatibility details) you'll have to tailor the package to handle things correctly.

This will go a bit easier with future packages, now that I understand the actual issue a little better, but it's still going to be time consuming to package and test things.

{{< sig >}}
